---
title: "Vectors and matrices: part 2"
date: 2020-11-20T16:52:22Z
draft: false
pre: "7. "
---


Now that we know how to handle matrices and vectors in MATLAB, we will look at how to perform operations on them.


## Addition, subtraction and multiplication of vectors and matrices

If two vectors or matrices are of the correct size, then they may be added, subtracted or multiplied using the standard operators `+ !nc`, `- !nc` and `* !nc`.

### Walkthrough

For example, enter the following vectors and matrices:

```matlab
u=[1 2];
v=[3; 4];
A=[1 2; 3 4];
B=[5 6; 7 8];
```

The following are valid operations:

```matlab
u*v
v*u
A+B
A-B
A*B
A*v
u*A
(A+B)*v
```

but

```matlab
A*u
```

is not.
Try entering the above operations in the command line.

{{% notice question %}}
What do the above operations represent and what is the result: a matrix; a vector; or a scalar?

{{%expand "Expand for solution"%}}
- `u*v` – inner product (dot product) – scalar (1 x 1).
- `v*u` – vector outer product – matrix (2 x 2).
- `A+B` – matrix addition – matrix (2 x 2).
- `A-B` – matrix subtraction – matrix (2 x 2).
- `A*B` – matrix multiplication – matrix (2 x 2).
- `A*v` – right multiplication of a matrix by a vector – vector (2 x 1).
- `u*A` – left multiplication of a matrix by a vector – vector (1 x 2).
- `(A+B)*v` – matrix addition and right multiplication – vector (2 x 1).
{{% /expand%}}

{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice question %}}
Why is `A*u` not a valid operation?

{{%expand "Expand for solution"%}}
The product `A*u` would represent right multiplication of a 2 x 2 matrix by a 1 x 2 vector, which is an incompatible matrix multiplication.
The appropriate dimensions must agree to use the `* !nc` operator.
Similarly, `v*A` would also fail.

Attempting an incompatible matrix multiplication will result in an error like this:

```plaintext
>> A*u
Error using  * 
Incorrect dimensions for matrix multiplication. Check that the number of columns in the first matrix matches the number of rows in the second matrix.
```
{{% /expand%}}

{{% /notice %}}


## Element-wise operations

Often we wish to perform operations on elements of a vector or a matrix.
We may, for example, have a vector of numbers and wish to calculate their squares.
This is done using the 'dot' command, `'.' !nc`

### Walkthrough

For example, enter the following vectors:

```matlab
u=[1 2 3 4];
v=[5 6 7 8];
```

To calculate the square of all elements of `u !nc` use the command:

```matlab
u.^2
```

To multiply each element of `u !nc` by the corresponding element of `v !nc` use:

```matlab
u.*v
```

This also works with matrices, for example:

```matlab
A.^2
```

{{% notice note %}}
This only works if the sizes of the vectors/matrices are the same.
It is good practice to clear your variables once you have finished using them.
{{% /notice %}}


## Generating vectors

It can be tedious to input vectors by specifying all the entries manually; the following are two methods to define vectors more quickly.

### Walkthrough

A row vector `x !nc` consisting of integers from 1 to 10 inclusive may be generated by typing:

```matlab
x=1:10
```

Furthermore, a row vector `x !nc` consisting of every odd integer from 1 to 9 inclusive may be generated by typing

```matlab
x=1:2:9
```

The central variable indicates the step size, so

```matlab
x=10:-1:1
```

would yield a row vector consisting of the integers from 1 to 10 inclusive, but in descending order.

A vector `y !nc` consisting of 100 points equally spaced between 5 and 15 may be generated by typing

```matlab
y=linspace(5,15,100)
```

look up the `linspace` command in the MATLAB help system.


## Some special matrices and vectors

MATLAB has inbuilt commands that can be used to create some simple matrices, which can be adapted using your own code to construct matrices of interest to you.
You will see examples of this in later units.

### Walkthrough
The 3 x 4 matrix with all entries equal to 0 may be produced using the command

```matlab
zeros(3,4)
```

The 5 x 2 matrix with all entries equal to 1 may be produced using the command

```matlab
ones(5,2)
```

The 4 x 6 matrix with diagonal entries equal to 1 and all other entries equal to 0 is given by

```matlab
eye(4,6)
```

The 2 x 1 matrix (that is, a column vector of length 2) with entries that are distributed randomly with a uniform distribution on the interval `$[0,1]$` is given by

```matlab
rand(2,1)
```

The 1 x 3 matrix (that is, a row vector of length 3) with entries uniformly distributed with mean 0 and standard deviation 1 is given by

```matlab
randn(1,3)
```

If the matrix required with any of the commands in this section is square, then the second index is not required, as for example with

```matlab
ones(4)
rand(2)
```
